Adds Ion Schema 2.0 specification (#82)
amzn/ion-schema: docs/isl-2-0/spec.md

Types are expressed with the Ion Schema Language (ISL), which consists of the syntax, constraints, and grammar presented in this document.

{% include note.html type="note" content="This document assumes that readers are familiar with the Ion data model defined in the [Amazon Ion Specification](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html)." %}

Ion Schema 2.0 builds upon the [Ion Schema 1.0 specification](../isl-1-0/spec), adding the changes from [RFC: Ion Schema 2.0](../../rfcs/ion_schema_2_0/ion_schema_2_0).
This document does not assume that the reader is familiar with the Ion Schema 1.0 specification.

### Grammar

This document provides snippets of a BNF-style grammar for the Ion Schema Language.
This grammar is intended as a learning aid and is _not_ authoritative.
The full BNF-style grammar can be found [here](bnf-grammar) along with a discussion of the grammar's known limitations.
For an authoritative grammar, see [`ion-schema-schemas`](https://github.com/amzn/ion-schema-schemas).

# Schemas

{% include grammar-element.md productions="schema,schema,header,header_field,footer" %}

> A schema is a collection of types that can be used to constraint the Ion data model.

Reviewer: nit: s/constraint/constrain

## Version Marker

{% include grammar-element.md productions="isl_version_marker" %}

The Ion Schema version marker for Ion Schema 2.0 is `$ion_schema_2_0`.
The Ion Schema version marker must appear in the schema document before any `type` or `schema_header` structs.
If a schema document has no version marker, then it is an Ion Schema 1.0 document, and it must follow the [Ion Schema 1.0 specification](../isl-1-0/spec).
If any Ion Schema version marker is found after the first `schema_header` or `type`, the schema document is invalid, and it will result in an error.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="An ISL 2.0 Schema" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## Imports

{% include grammar-element.md productions="imports_declaration,import,import_schema,import_type,import_type_alias" %}

An import allows types from other schemas to be used within a schema definition.
An import that only specifies an `id` makes all the types from that schema available for use in the current schema.
Specifying a `type` narrows the import to that single type, and a type may be imported with a different name by specifying: `as: <TYPE_ALIAS>`.

> The core types and Ion types are implicitly imported before any specified imports; specified imports are performed in order, and an import that cannot be resolved must result in an error. 

Reviewer: "cannot be resolved" when? At the point it is imported? Or after we have closed over the defined imports?

Author: After we have closed over the defined imports, I suppose, but the exact timing of when imports are "looked up" depends on the implementation. The requirement is that when loading a schema, an implementation must recursively load all imported schemas (and imported types). E.g. given schema A, which imports schema B, the implementation cannot say that it has finished loading schema A until schema B is also loaded.

Thanks for pointing this out—I will add more details.

- **scalars:** `$blob`, `$bool`, `$clob`, `$decimal`, `$float`, `$int`, `$null`,
  `$string`, `$symbol`, `$timestamp`
- **containers:** `$list`, `$sexp`, `$struct`

Ion Schema adds one more nominal type, `document`, which is a stream of top-level Ion values.
Ion Schema implementations may represent this stream as a list, sequence, array, or other similar data structure depending on what is idiomatic for the language in which it is implemented.

In addition, Ion Schema provides the following structural types:

- `nothing`: the [empty type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empty_type); it has no valid value
- `$any`: the [top type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top_type); every value is valid
- `any`: represents any value that is not a null value
- `blob`, `bool`, `clob`, `decimal`, `float`, `int`, `string`, `symbol`, `timestamp`, `list`, `sexp`, `struct` correspond to the Ion types, except that they do not allow null values.
- `$lob`: represents a `$blob` or `$clob`
- `lob`: represents a `blob` or `clob`
- `$number`: represents a `$decimal`, `$float`, or `$int`

> - `number`: represents a `decimal`, `float`, or `int`

Reviewer: ... that is non-null. Maybe a little refactoring of this section would avoid needing to respecify that.

Reviewer: More broadly... I read the writeup about the potential ambiguities with `nullable` in 1.0 and my recollection from working with it was that it was confusing. So I agree that we can and should do better with 2.0.

I also agree that the solution should be conceptually sound and it should be reasonably obvious how to do the common things. I can see how the model here reflects the ion type system, but I suspect that users will find it confusing, for two reasons: remembering presence or absence of '$' sigil (consider something like Kotlin's '?'), and my experience is that most users, when something is null, don't actually care if it's strongly typed or not.

Were there some other models that were considered and rejected?

Author: > Maybe a little refactoring of this section would avoid needing to respecify that

Sure, I can do that.

> Were there some other models that were considered and rejected?

Does this question refer to other models for the built-in types in general, or does it refer specifically to the replacement for `nullable`?

Reviewer: Replacement for `nullable`.

Author: Yes. Based on the goal of finding a replacement that was explicit about what would be null (ie. no figuring out "base types"), we came up with the following alternatives that were considered:

1. __`nullable` field in type definitions that define which typed nulls are allowed with the nullable annotation.__ This was rejected for being "awkward" and also because it looks like a constraint but behaves unlike any other constraint. The `nullable` field could also be on a type that is imported from another file, making it more difficult for a human reader to discover what sort of null would be allowed.
2. __`nullable::` annotation changed to always allow any sort of null at all.__ This was rejected because it would be weird/unintuitive for `nullable::struct` to allow a `null.int`—it doesn't properly support any use case that people would want to use `nullable` for.
3. __Get rid of nullable entirely__. This was considered the second-best option, but everyone who was consulted agreed that nullability is a common enough use case that we should provide some sort of syntactical sugar for it.
4. __Replace `nullable` with `nullable_text`, `nullable_string`, `nullable_struct`, etc. annotations to indicate which types of nulls should be allowed.__ This was rejected for being more complex than what seemed necessary.  However, rejecting this is not a one-way door with respect to the chosen solution. It would be possible in Ion Schema 2.1 to add annotations like `null_string_or::`, etc. so that there is syntactical sugar for all of the strongly-typed nulls.

The set of values which belong to a type is the intersection of the values that satisfy each constraint.
In order for a value to be a valid instance of a type, the value must not violate any of the type's constraints.
A type definition with no constraints is equivalent to `$any`.

{% include example.md title="The definition of `$any`, the top type" markdown="
```ion
type::{
  name: $any,
}
```
" %}

Top-level types must declare a `name`. All other type definitions must not declare a `name`.

## Type References

{% include grammar-element.md productions="type_reference,type_name,import_type" %}

Some constraints accept a type or list of types as their argument.

### Nullable Type References

As a convenience, Ion Schema provides syntactical sugar for handling nullable values.
The `$null_or` annotation modifies a type reference to also allow the `null` (or `null.null`) value.
The `$null_or` annotation may not be added to top-level type definitions; it is only applicable to type references.
When the `$null_or` annotation is present on any type reference, it SHALL be evaluated equivalently to the union of `$null` and the annotated type.

> For example, to allow `null` or any non-null integer value, you would use `$null_or::int`.

Reviewer: I'd be curious how often folks want to constrain to allow untyped but not typed null.

Author: We don't know, nor do we have a good way of knowing.

> my experience is that most users, when something is null, don't actually care if it's strongly typed or not

I agree, but I would add I think users benefit from having a single representation of null within their application. So they might not care if it's a strongly typed null or not, but they don't want a mix of the two. It's like indenting code—in many languages you can indent with 2 spaces or 4 spaces (we're ignoring tab characters). What matters most is not how much white space is used for indenting, but that the amount of whitespace is consistent.

Applicable for `struct` values.

The field_names constraint defines the type and/or constraints for all field names within a struct.
Field names are symbols and will be represented as symbol values for the purpose of validation.
Any value that is not a struct as well as `null.struct` will always be invalid for this constraint.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="Limiting the length of field names" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}
{% comment %}{% include example.md title="Limiting the characters used in field names" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

The `distinct` annotation on the type reference argument indicates that the constraint should not allow field names to be repeated within a single struct.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="Disallowing repeated field names" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## fields

{% include grammar-element.md productions="fields,field" %}

Declares one or more field constraints of a struct.

Field names defined for a particular struct type shall be unique.
A field may narrow its declared type by specifying additional constraints. 

> By default, a field is constrained by `occurs: optional`.

Reviewer 2: Just would like to confirm that the constraint 'occurs' in the field could not be overridden right ? Since the field name shall be unique. Is 'occurs: 1' acceptable here?

Author: Good catch. This is something that I copied from the Ion Schema 1.0 spec, and it still talks about `occurs` as if it is a constraint. It would probably be more clear to say it that if `occurs` is not specified, then the field may occur 0 or 1 times.

Yes, `occurs: 1` (or equivalently `occurs: required`) would be acceptable for someone to add in their schema.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`timestamp_precision`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## type

{% include grammar-element.md productions="type" %}

Indicates the type that a value shall be validated against.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`type`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## utf8_byte_length

{% include grammar-element.md productions="utf8_byte_length" %}

An exact or minimum/maximum indicating number of bytes in the [UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8) representation of a string or symbol.
The values `null.string` and `null.symbol` do not have a length of 0.
Rather, they have no length at all, and are always invalid for this constraint.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`utf8_byte_length`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## valid_values

{% include grammar-element.md productions="valid_values,value_or_range" %}

A list of acceptable, non-annotated values;  any values not present in the list are invalid.
The argument to this constraint can be a range or a list of unannotated values or a list containing a mix of ranges and unannotated values.

> Ignoring annotations, the value must match one of the list of valid values or be within the boundaries of a range.

Reviewer 2: The range included in the `valid_values` does not follow the behaviors of constraint `range` right?

Author: I'm not sure I understand what it is that you are asking. Do you mind clarifying, maybe with an example if possible?

Reviewer 2: > The range included in the `valid_values` does not follow the behaviors of constraint `range` right?

Sorry for the unclear question. The argument of `valid_values` could be a `range`: i.e. `valid_values: range::[0, 3] `which indicates the valid value should be within this range, and my understanding is the end values of this range  should be exclusive by default. According to the `Ranges` section, if we desire to exclude the end values, we should annotate the value with 'exclusive' and the default behavior is for both ends of the range to be 'inclusive'. 

TL;DR: What is the default behavior of the `range` included in the `valid_values`? Is that aligned with the `Ranges` we defined before?

Author: Yes, it is aligned. All ranges have inclusive endpoints unless annotated by `exclusive::`.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="An ISL 2.0 Schema" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## Imports

{% include grammar-element.md productions="imports_declaration,import,import_schema,import_type,import_type_alias" %}

An import allows types from other schemas to be used within a schema definition.
An import that only specifies an `id` makes all the types from that schema available for use in the current schema.
Specifying a `type` narrows the import to that single type, and a type may be imported with a different name by specifying: `as: <TYPE_ALIAS>`.
The core types and Ion types are implicitly imported before any specified imports; specified imports are performed in order.
Once an implementation has finished loading a schema, if any imports could not be resolved, it must result in an error. 
If two types with the same name are imported, or if a type defined within a schema has the same name as an imported type, this must result in an error.
Only named types of a schema may be imported in another schema.

> Types may only be imported from the schema where they are declared; importing a type to a schema does not make that type transitively available to any other schemas. 

Reviewer 3: It would be good have an example of re-exporting an imported type in the ISL cookbook.

Author: Created #91 to track that.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="A schema that imports types from other schemas" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

### Schema Authorities

> The structure of a `id` string is defined by the schema authority responsible for the schema/type(s) being imported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The structure of an `id` string is defined by the schema authority responsible for the schema/type(s) being imported.
```

> Note that runtime resolution of a schema over a network presents availability and security risks, and should therefore be avoided.

Reviewer 3: I know this is not new language, but it strikes me as perhaps overly opinionated for the spec. What do folks think about softening it to:

> Note that runtime resolution of a schema over a network presents availability and security risks **that must be taken into consideration.**

?

Author: I agree with you. I will change it.

When resolving a schema, authorities may choose to follow well-known patterns; for example:
- a filesystem authority might specify that an `id` string corresponds to an ISL file relative to some base, e.g.:`"{base}/com/example/core/Customer.isl"`
- a REST authority might specify that an `id` string is a resource URL that corresponds to an ISL file, e.g.: `"https://{host}:{port}/{base}/com/example/core/Customer"` (again, note the inherent availability and security risks here)

> Beware that the choice of authority affects the way schemas can be imported by other schemas.

Reviewer 3: This statement would benefit from a clarifying example.

Author: I chose to just remove the statement since I couldn't think of any good clarifying example. I don't think there actually is anything inherently dangerous with choosing the "wrong" authority. You just need to make sure that (as mentioned a few lines earlier):

>  structure of an `id` string is defined by the schema authority responsible for the schema/type(s) being imported

... and so if you have an `id` string (in an import), you need to make sure that you have the authority that is responsible for that schema id.

# Types

The Ion Schema type system is a hybrid of [nominal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nominal_type_system) and [structural](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structural_type_system) typing.
All Ion values are nominally one of the types defined in the [Ion data model](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#the-ion-data-model).
Beyond that, a value (or stream of values) may belong to one or more structural types.

{% include note.html type="note" content="
The [_universal type_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top_type) (sometimes called the _top type_) is a type that includes all possible values.
In Ion Schema, the universal type is called `$any`, and it is defined as a type with no constraints.
" %}

## Built-in Types

Ion Schema has several built-in types that are implicitly imported before any other imports are handled.

> The nominal Ion types are prefixed with `$`, and correspond precisely with the types defined by the Ion data model, including strongly-typed null values:

Reviewer 3: > correspond precisely with the types defined by the Ion data model, including strongly-typed null values

I find this (pre-existing) sentence is a bit muddy. I think it means that (e.g.) `$int` represents the union of [`int` and `null.int`] and does NOT include `null`/`null.null`. If that's the case, I think we should spell it out.

- **scalars:** `$blob`, `$bool`, `$clob`, `$decimal`, `$float`, `$int`, `$null`,
  `$string`, `$symbol`, `$timestamp`
- **containers:** `$list`, `$sexp`, `$struct`

Ion Schema adds one more nominal type, `document`, which is a stream of top-level Ion values.
Ion Schema implementations may represent this stream as a list, sequence, array, or other similar data structure depending on what is idiomatic for the language in which it is implemented.

In addition, Ion Schema provides the following structural types:

- `$any`: the _universal type_; includes every possible value
- `$lob`: represents a `$blob` or `$clob`
- `$number`: represents a `$decimal`, `$float`, or `$int`
- `$text`: represents a `$string` or `$symbol`

> - `any`: represents any value that is not a null value

Reviewer 3: If my understanding of `$` is correct, there's a peculiar corner case with `any`. 

For every other type, `$` is equivalent to the union of that type plus the corresponding strongly typed null. However, `$any` includes the strongly typed nulls _and_ `null.null`, meaning that `$any` is implicitly also using a `$null_or`.

I don't think there's a TODO here, just an observation.

Author: Well, technically, `$any` also includes the type `$null`. I think it's better to frame `any` as a union of `bool`, `int`, etc. and `$any` is the union of `$null`, `$bool`, `$int`, etc.

I'll think about how I can update the spec to make it clear what's going on.

- `blob`, `bool`, `clob`, `decimal`, `float`, `int`, `string`, `symbol`, `timestamp`, `list`, `sexp`, `struct` correspond to the Ion types, except that they do not allow null values.
- `lob`: represents a (non-null) `blob` or `clob`
- `number`: represents a (non-null) `decimal`, `float`, or `int`
- `text`: represents a (non-null) `string` or `symbol`
- `nothing`: the [_empty type_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empty_type); it has no valid value

{% include note.html type="tip" content="

> For the built-in types, the presence of a leading `$` sigil indicates that the type includes null values.

Reviewer 3: > the type includes null values

But only strongly typed null values, yes? (Which is why we're introducing `$null_or` to accommodate `null.null`?)

Either way, it would be good to clarify that.

### Declaring a Type Name

A _named type definition_ is a special case of type definition.
A named type definition must be a top-level value in the schema document that is annotated with `type`. 
A named type definition must contain the field `name`, where the value is an Ion symbol that is to be the name of the type.
All other type definitions must not declare a `name`.

<!-- TODO: add example of named vs inline type -->

## Type References

{% include grammar-element.md productions="type_reference,type_name,import_type" %}

Some constraints accept a type reference or list of type references as their argument.

### Nullable Type References

As a convenience, Ion Schema provides syntactical sugar for handling nullable values.
The `$null_or` annotation modifies a type reference to also allow the `null` (or `null.null`) value.
The `$null_or` annotation may not be added to top-level type definitions; it is only applicable to type references.
When the `$null_or` annotation is present on any type reference, it SHALL be evaluated equivalently to the union of `$null` and the annotated type.

For example, to allow `null` or any non-null integer value, you would use `$null_or::int`.

> To allow `null`, `null.int`, or any non-null integer value, you would use `$null_or::$int`.

Reviewer 3: This confirms my understanding of `$`, but I think we should be crisper about it early in the document.

{% include grammar-element.md productions="variably_occurring_type_reference,occurs" %}

While it is valid for a constraint to be repeated, `occurs` is not a constraint and may not appear more than once in any type definition.
The field `occurs` is never allowed in a `NAMED_TYPE_DEFINITION`.

The `occurs` field is optional.
Each constraint that accepts a variably-occurring type reference specifies what the default `occurs` value is for that constraint. 

# Constraints

Constraints are the fundamental building blocks of types.
Each constraint is a rule that restricts the values that are valid for the type.

The order of constraints does not matter.
Constraints can be repeated, and when they are, both instances of the constraint will apply.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="Repeated constraints" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

Generally speaking, constraints must reject null values as invalid.
For example, the precision and scale constraints must reject a null value, as `null` does not have a precision or scale to evaluate.

> The `fields` constraint must reject `null.struct`, as `null.struct` doesn't have any fields.

Reviewer 3: There's an opportunity to distinguish between `{}` and `null.struct` here:
```suggestion
The `fields` constraint must reject `null.struct`, as `null.struct` doesn't have a collection of fields.
```

### Ranges

{% include grammar-element.md productions="range_int,range_number,range_timestamp,range_timestamp_precision,number,exclusivity" %}

Some constraints can be defined by a range.
A range is represented by a list annotated with `range`, and containing two values, in order: the minimum and maximum ends of the range.
The default behavior is for both ends of the range to be *inclusive*; 
if *exclusive* behavior is desired, the minimum or maximum (or both) values shall be annotated with `exclusive`.
If the minimum or maximum end of a range is to be unspecified, this shall be represented by the symbols `min` or `max`, respectively; 
the `exclusive`annotation is not applicable when the symbols `min` or `max` are specified.
A range may not contain both `min` and `max`.

All ranges have a type.
The type of the range is the same as that of the minimum and/or maximum values specified in the range list. 
If both a minimum and maximum values are specified (i.e. `min` and `max` are not used), then both of those values must be of the same type. 

> (For example, `range::[1995-12-06T, 55.4]` mixes values of the timestamp and number types, and therefore is not a valid range.)

Reviewer 3: Reading this example, I wondered how we distinguished between `[int, int]` ranges and `[number, number]`, but I guess it's precedence in the grammar? (If a range is made of ints it will match `[int, int]` first?)

Author: It depends on where it is being used.
- For `valid_values` a range should always be parsed as `[number, number]` or `[timestamp, timestamp]`.
- For `timestamp_precision` it must always be a timestamp precision range. 
- For every other constraint that uses a range (as well as `occurs`) the range must be `[int, int]`.

## all_of

{% include grammar-element.md productions="all_of" %}

Value must be valid for all the types listed. The list of types must not be empty.

{% include example.md title="`all_of` constraint" markdown="
```ion
type::{
  name: Duck,
  all_of: [
    WalksLikeADuck,
    QuacksLikeADuck,
  ]
}
```
" %}

## annotations

{% include grammar-element.md productions="annotations,annotations_modifier" %}

Restricts the allowed annotations on a value.
Applicable to all types except `document` (since documents cannot be annotated).
This constraint has two available syntaxes.
The "Standard" syntax is very expressive, but can be verbose for simple use cases.
The "Simple" syntax is based on the Ion Schema 1.0 `annotations` syntax, and is concise, but only supports a limited set of use cases.

### Standard Syntax

The `annotations` constraint specifies the type and/or constraints for all annotations of a value.

> [The annotations themselves are symbols _tokens_](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#annot) but will be represented as a non-null list of non-null, un-annotated symbol _values_ for the purpose of validation.

Reviewer 3: Phrasing suggestion:
```suggestion
[The annotations themselves are symbols _tokens_](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#annot) but will be considered a non-null list of non-null, un-annotated symbol _values_ for the purpose of validation.
```
Subjectively, "will be represented as" feels like an implementation detail.

The list of annotation symbols must match the given type.

{% capture sample_code %}
annotations: { contains: [red, blue] }                   // Annotations must contain "red" and "blue" in any order, and may contain other annotations, such as "yellow"
annotations: { element: { valid_values: [red, blue] } }  // Only the annotations "red" and "blue" are permitted, but they are not required
annotations: { container_length: 0 }                     // No annotations are permitted

> annotations: { element: { regex: "\\w+(\\.\\w+)" } }     // Annotations must match the regex

Reviewer 3: I seem to recall that using the `ordered_elements` constraint on `annotations` was one of the motivations for the expanded syntax in ISL 2.0. Is that correct? If so, it would be good to include an example of that.

Author: The ISL 1.0 syntax already had an `ordered` annotation for the `annotations` constraint, but I think the expanded syntax helps bring some consistency to how we handle ordered things.

The main motivation was that the ISL 1.0 syntax doesn't allow you to specify any constraint-based rule for the annotation _text_—you could only specify a literal annotation text—nor any rule for the number of annotations.

I'll add a few more examples.

annotations: required::[red, blue]                // Annotations must contain "red" and "blue" in any order, and may contain other annotations, such as "yellow"
annotations: closed::required::[red, green, blue] // Annotations must contain exactly "red", "green", and "blue" in any order
annotations: closed::[red, blue]                  // Only the annotations "red" and "blue" are permitted, but they are not required
annotations: closed::[]                           // No annotations are permitted
{% endcapture %}
{% include example.md title="`annotations` constraint; simplified syntax" code=sample_code %}

Anything that can be represented by the simplified syntax can also be represented by the standard syntax.

<!-- TODO: Add examples of equivalence between standard and simplified syntax -->

## any_of

{% include grammar-element.md productions="any_of" %}

The value must match any of the specified types. The list of types must not be empty.

{% include example.md title="`any_of` constraint" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}

## byte_length

{% include grammar-element.md productions="byte_length" %}

The exact or minimum/maximum number of bytes in a blob or clob.

> Note that this constrains the number of bytes in the input source, which may differ from the number of bytes needed to serialize the blob/clob.

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understood this bit. If I have a text clob `{{'''hello'''}}`, there are 15 bytes of input but the clob's content is only 5 bytes long. `byte_length` constrains the 5, right? Not the 15?

Author: Correct. `byte_length` constrains the value rather than the encoded representation. I'll rework this to make it more clear.

If a value is specified more than once, the repeated instances of the value have no effect.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`contains`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## element

{% include grammar-element.md productions="element" %}

Defines the type and/or constraints for all values within a homogeneous list, S-expression, document, or struct.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`element`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

The `distinct` annotation on the type reference argument indicates that the constraint should not allow repeated elements within the container.
For the purpose of this constraint, the comparison of the values (including any annotations) in the container is governed by the equivalence rules defined by the [Ion data model](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#the-ion-data-model).

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="Disallowing duplicate elements" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## exponent

{% include grammar-element.md productions="exponent" %}

This constraint specifies an exact or minimum/maximum range indicating the exponent of the Ion decimal.

> Remember that decimal values with digits after the decimal point have a _negative_ exponent, so to require at least two digits after

Reviewer 3: Looks like the tail of this sentence was lost.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`ordered_elements`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## precision

{% include grammar-element.md productions="precision" %}

Applicable for `decimal`.
An exact or minimum/maximum indicating the number of digits in the unscaled value of a decimal.
The minimum precision must be greater than or equal to `1`.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`precision`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## regex

{% include grammar-element.md productions="regex" %}

Tests whether a `symbol` or `string` has any matches for the given regular expression.
The regular expression is a string that conforms to a *RegularExpressionBody* defined by [ECMA 262 Regular Expressions](https://www.ecma-international.org/ecma-262/5.1/#sec-7.8.5).
Regular expressions shall be limited to the following features:

|                     |                                      |
|--------------------:|--------------------------------------|
|                     | Unicode codepoints match themselves  |
|                 `.` | any codepoint                        |
|             `[abc]` | codepoint class                      |

> |             `[a-z]` | range codepoint class                |

Reviewer 3: I think basic regex supports a combined class like `[a-nz]` (the range `a-n` union `z`). Do we support that?

Author: Yes. We also support `[a-f\d]`. I'll update the table to reflect these.

`number` ranges do not include values of any other type.
The `float` type includes [special non-number values](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/float.html#special-values) (`nan`, `+inf`, and `-inf`).
Attempting to use a non-number value as the bound of a number range will result in an error.
When tested for inclusion in a number range, the non-number float values are always outside the bounds of the number range, even when one of the range bounds is `min` or `max`.
Number-typed `null` values are never valid for any number range.

A `timestamp` range includes any `timestamp` that falls between the minimum and maximum in chronological order.
All [`timestamp` values](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#timestamp) represent an instant in time.
A `timestamp` with limited precision (for example, a year-only timestamp like `2007T`) maps to an instant by assuming that all unspecified time unit fields are effectively zero (or one for the month and day units). 
`2007T` would map to the instant represented by `2007-01-01T00:00.000-00:00`.

> Note that `timestamp` values that do not have a time component (that is: `YYYYT`, `YYYY-MMT`, and `YYYY-MM-DDT`) timestamps) have an unknown offset (`-00:00`).

Reviewer 3: There's an extra `)` at the end of this line.

Timestamps that have an unknown offset are UTC timestamps that make no assertion about the offset in which they occurred.
The value `null.timestamp` is never in the bounds of a timestamp range, and `timestamp` ranges do not include values of any other type.

# Open Content

{% include grammar-element.md productions="user_content_declaration,user_content_declaration_field" %}

The Ion Schema 2.0 specification allows users to insert additional content into a schema document that is not part of the Ion Schema Language.
This additional content may be used for documentation, integrations with other tools or frameworks, or any other desired purpose.

A schema header, type definition, or schema footer may include extra fields that are not explicitly stated in the Ion Schema specification.
These extra fields may have any field name that is not a *keyword*.
If the field name is a *reserved symbol*, its use as open content must be declared in the appropriate subfield of the `user_content` field in the schema header.

> For example, the reserved word `list_type` may be used in a type definition if `user_content: { type: [ list_type ] }` is present in the schema header.

Reviewer 3: I assume that 'reserved word' here is used interchangeably with 'reserved symbol'? May be worth just sticking to the one phrase.

> An Ion Schema MAY include extra top-level values that are not explicitly specified in the Ion Schema specification, but any top-level open content MUST NOT be annotated with a *reserved symbol*.

Reviewer 3: An example would be appreciated here. Can those extra top-level values appear before/after the header/footer? We should spell that out.

Note that Ion Schema version markers are always interpreted as Ion Schema version markers and can never be valid open content.

No other open content is allowed except for what is explicitly identified in this section.

### Reserved Symbols

The set of reserved symbols SHALL be all symbols matching the regular expression `^(\$ion_schema(_.*)?|[a-z][a-z0-9]*(_[a-z0-9]+)*)$`.
Informally stated, this is the symbol `$ion_schema`, all symbols starting with `$ion_schema_`, and all [identifier symbols](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#symbol) that are *snake case* and start with an unaccented ascii, lower-case letter.

### Keywords
A keyword is a reserved symbol that has been assigned a meaning by the Ion Schema specification.

> Whether a reserved symbol is considered a keyword is context dependent.

Reviewer 3: What do we buy ourselves by making keyword status context dependent rather than saying (e.g.) `imports` is a keyword everywhere? I can't think of any programming languages or similar that have context-sensitive keyword reservations.

Author: Presumably whoever wrote the RFC for open content (me 😬 ) thought that the set of keywords should be as minimal as possible, and that's why it's context dependent.

What do we gain by it? Nothing, really. There's no benefit for Ion Schema users except that they could use "valid_values", etc. in the header or footer (not a compelling reason, IMO). It increases the cognitive burden for users, and it (slightly) complicates implementations of Ion Schema.

Reviewer 4: I'm a big fan of not picking up cognitive overhead and implementation complication without stronger motivation. Good catch @zslayton and good explanation @popematt. I'm in favor of changing this to remove context dependence.

* There are no keywords in a schema footer.

{% capture sample_code %}
schema_header::{
  _info: "This schema is about penguins."
}
type::{
  name: adelie,
  type: penguin,
  _region: antarctica,
  _crested: false,
  _banded: false,
}
type::{
  name: humboldt,
  type: penguin,
  _region: south_america,
  _crested: false,
  _banded: true,
}
schema_footer::{}
{% endcapture %}
{% include example.md title="A schema with open content using un-reserved symbols as open content field names." code=sample_code %}

{% capture sample_code %}
schema_header::{
  info: "This schema is about penguins."
  user_content: {
    schema_header: [info],
    type: [region, crested, banded],
  }
}
type::{
  name: adelie,
  type: penguin,
  region: antarctica,
  crested: false,
  banded: false,
}
type::{
  name: humboldt,
  type: penguin,
  region: south_america,
  crested: false,
  banded: true,
}
schema_footer::{}
{% endcapture %}
{% include example.md title="The same schema with open content using reserved symbols as open content field names." code=sample_code %}

# Compatibility with Ion Schema 1.0

Ion Schema 2.0 will be fully interoperable with Ion Schema 1.0.

> * Any Ion Schema implementation with support for Ion Schema 2.0 must also support reading Ion Schema 1.0.

Reviewer 3: We need to have a document that spells out the parts of the spec are different in 2.0 so an implementer doesn't have to manually cross reference the 1.0 and 2.0 specs to discover the changes. Maybe the RFC suffices for this? Whichever doc we pick, this would be a good place to link to it to highlight that the differences are manageable.

Author: Created #92, and I added a reference to the RFC.

- `lob`: represents a (non-null) `blob` or `clob`
- `number`: represents a (non-null) `decimal`, `float`, or `int`
- `text`: represents a (non-null) `string` or `symbol`
- `nothing`: the [empty type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empty_type); it has no valid value

{% include note.html type="tip" content="
For the built-in types, the presence of a leading `$` sigil indicates that the type includes null values.
" %}

## Type Definitions

{% include grammar-element.md productions="named_type_definition,inline_type_definition,variably_occurring_type_reference" %}

A type consists of a collection of zero or more constraints.
The set of values which belong to a type is the intersection of the values that satisfy each constraint.
In order for a value to be a valid instance of a type, the value must not violate any of the type's constraints.
A type definition with no constraints is equivalent to `$any`.

{% include example.md title="The definition of `$any`, the top type" markdown="
```ion
type::{
  name: $any,
}
```
" %}

> Top-level types must declare a `name`. All other type definitions must not declare a `name`.

Reviewer 5: (Suggestion) I see that you have already declared top type in the above section for built-in types. But this does create slight confusion between top type and top-level type. 
I think we should either use the word top type or top-level type everywhere.

Author: Thanks for pointing this out. A "top-level type" is actually a different thing than "the top type". I'll see about adding some explanatory notes or changing some terms so that it's clear.

Author: I've updated the spec to use "universal type" instead of "top type". (They are synonyms, but I think "universal type" is a better choice to avoid confusion here.)

## Type References

{% include grammar-element.md productions="type_reference,type_name,import_type" %}

> Some constraints accept a type or list of types as their argument.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Some constraints accept a type reference or list of type references as their argument.
```

The universal type `$any` is an exception since it also includes the untyped null.
" %}

{% include note.html type="note" content="
You may have noticed that there is a `$null` type, but there is no corresponding `null` type (as there is with `$int` and `int`).
That is because a non-null equivalent of the type `$null` is an empty type.
The non-null equivalent of `$null` is actually `nothing`.
" %}

## Type Definitions

{% include grammar-element.md productions="named_type_definition,inline_type_definition,variably_occurring_type_reference" %}

A type consists of a collection of zero or more constraints.
The set of values which belong to a type is the intersection of the values that satisfy each constraint.
In order for a value to be a valid instance of a type, the value must not violate any of the type's constraints.
A type definition with no constraints is equivalent to `$any`.

### Declaring a Type Name

A _named type definition_ is a special case of type definition.
A named type definition must be a top-level value in the schema document that is annotated with `type`. 

> A named type definition must contain the field `name`, where the value is an Ion symbol that is to be the name of the type.

Reviewer 6: Is there a good reason to require `name` to be a symbol vs. text?

Author: It's mostly just from historical precedent—it keeps things a little simpler for implementations if the rule here is the same for Ion Schema 1.0 and 2.0. Requiring only a symbol means we don't have to explain whether `"foo"`  and `'foo'` are considered as equivalent or distinct type names.

Do you know of any reasons to allow `name` to be text instead of just a symbol?

Reviewer 6: > Do you know of any reasons to allow name to be text instead of just a symbol?

Not really, just that intuitively it's not the name's *type* that matters, just its content. There isn't a good enough reason at this point to diverge from the precedent.

{% include example.md title="Nullable Type Reference" markdown="
The following types are equivalent.

```ion
type::{
  name: foo,
  type: $null_or::int
}
```
```ion
type::{
  name: bar,
  type: { one_of:[$null, int] }
}
```
" %}

### Variably-Occurring Type References

Some constraints allow a quantity to be specified along with a type reference.
The quantity is given by the `occurs` field, and the field value can be one of `optional`, `required`, a non-negative integer, or an integer range.

{% include grammar-element.md productions="variably_occurring_type_reference,occurs" %}

While it is valid for a constraint to be repeated, `occurs` is not a constraint and may not appear more than once in any type definition.
The field `occurs` is never allowed in a `NAMED_TYPE_DEFINITION`.

The `occurs` field is optional.
Each constraint that accepts a variably-occurring type reference specifies what the default `occurs` value is for that constraint. 

# Constraints

Constraints are the fundamental building blocks of types.
Each constraint is a rule that restricts the values that are valid for the type.

The order of constraints does not matter.

> Constraints can be repeated, and when they are, both instances of the constraint will apply.

Reviewer 6: both instances -> all instances?

For example, the precision and scale constraints must reject a null value, as `null` does not have a precision or scale to evaluate.
The `fields` constraint must reject `null.struct`, as `null.struct` doesn't have a collection of fields.
Similar reasoning applies to the expected handling of null values by most constraints.
The `contains`, `annotations`, `valid_values`, and type-algebra constraints are exceptions to this, as these constraints may be defined such that a null value is valid.

### Ranges

{% include grammar-element.md productions="range_int,range_number,range_timestamp,range_timestamp_precision,number,exclusivity" %}

Some constraints can be defined by a range.
A range is represented by a list annotated with `range`, and containing two values, in order: the minimum and maximum ends of the range.
The default behavior is for both ends of the range to be *inclusive*; 
if *exclusive* behavior is desired, the minimum or maximum (or both) values shall be annotated with `exclusive`.
If the minimum or maximum end of a range is to be unspecified, this shall be represented by the symbols `min` or `max`, respectively; 

> the `exclusive`annotation is not applicable when the symbols `min` or `max` are specified.

Reviewer 6: "not applicable", or "not allowed"? If I do `range::[1, exclusive::max]`, what happens?

Author: Not allowed is more accurate.

annotations: required::[red, blue]                // Annotations must contain "red" and "blue" in any order, and may contain other annotations, such as "yellow"
annotations: closed::required::[red, green, blue] // Annotations must contain exactly "red", "green", and "blue" in any order
annotations: closed::[red, blue]                  // Only the annotations "red" and "blue" are permitted, but they are not required
annotations: closed::[]                           // No annotations are permitted
{% endcapture %}
{% include example.md title="`annotations` constraint; simplified syntax" code=sample_code %}

Anything that can be represented by the simplified syntax can also be represented by the standard syntax.

<!-- TODO: Add examples of equivalence between standard and simplified syntax -->

## any_of

{% include grammar-element.md productions="any_of" %}

The value must match any of the specified types. The list of types must not be empty.

{% include example.md title="`any_of` constraint" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}

## byte_length

{% include grammar-element.md productions="byte_length" %}

The exact or minimum/maximum number of bytes in a blob or clob.

> Note that this constrains the number of bytes in the blob or clob _value_, which may differ from the number of bytes needed to serialize the blob/clob.

Reviewer 6: "may differ" -> "differs" ? Is there a case where the number of bytes in the value *doesn't* differ from the number of bytes needed to serialize the value (due to value header/delimiters)?

Author: This was a carry over from the ISL 1.0 spec, but you're right—it is impossible for the number of bytes in the value to be the same as the number of bytes used to serialize the value. The serialized size will always be larger.

If a value is specified more than once, the repeated instances of the value have no effect.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`contains`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## element

{% include grammar-element.md productions="element" %}

Defines the type and/or constraints for all values within a homogeneous list, S-expression, document, or struct.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`element`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

The `distinct` annotation on the type reference argument indicates that the constraint should not allow repeated elements within the container.
For the purpose of this constraint, the comparison of the values (including any annotations) in the container is governed by the equivalence rules defined by the [Ion data model](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#the-ion-data-model).

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="Disallowing duplicate elements" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## exponent

{% include grammar-element.md productions="exponent" %}

This constraint specifies an exact or minimum/maximum range indicating the exponent of the Ion decimal.

> Remember that decimal values with digits after the decimal point have a _negative_ exponent, so to require at least two digits after the decimal point, you must specify `exponent: range::[min, -2]`.

Reviewer 6: The constraint applies to the normalized form of a decimal, right? Is that worth clarifying here?

For example, does `1.23d2` match the same exponent ranges as `123.`?

Author: Yes, it applies to the normalized form. I can add a note about that.

{% include note.html type="tip" content="See [Modeling SQL Decimals](../cookbook/sql-decimals.md) to learn how `exponent` relates to the concept of _scale_." %} 

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`exponent` exact" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}
{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`exponent` range" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

### Converting from Ion Schema 1.0 `scale` to `exponent`

The `exponent` constraint replaces the `scale` constraint found in ISL 1.0.
To convert a from `scale` to `exponent`, simply multiply a single argument by -1 (e.g. `scale: 4` becomes `exponent: -4`) or reflect the range relative to 0 (e.g. `scale: range::[min, 5]` becomes `exponent: range::[-5, max]`).

## field_names

{% include grammar-element.md productions="field_names" %}

Applicable for `struct` values.

The field_names constraint defines the type and/or constraints for all field names within a struct.

> Field names are symbols and will be represented as symbol values for the purpose of validation.

Reviewer 6: You previously referred to annotations as symbol *tokens*; I'd expect field names to share that classification, but you've used 'symbols' here.

The offset `"+00:00"` is equivalent to `Z`.
The offset `"-00:00"` represents unknown local offset.
For more details about offsets, see the [Ion Specification – Timestamps](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#timestamp).

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`timestamp_offset`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## timestamp_precision

{% include grammar-element.md productions="timestamp_precision,timestamp_precision_value,range_timestamp_precision" %}

Indicates the exact or minimum/maximum precision of a timestamp.
Timestamp precision ranges follow the rules set out in [§Ranges](#ranges).
Valid timestamp precision values are, in order of increasing precision: `year`, `month`, `day`, `minute`, `second`, `millisecond`, `microsecond`, and `nanosecond`.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`timestamp_precision`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

## type

{% include grammar-element.md productions="type" %}

Indicates the type that a value shall be validated against.

{% comment %}{% include example.md title="`type`" code_file="examples/placeholder.isl" %}{% endcomment %}

> ## utf8_byte_length

Reviewer 6: It might be a good idea to provide some guidance about when users should choose `codepoint_length` vs `utf8_byte_length`.

Number-typed `null` values are never valid for any number range.

A `timestamp` range includes any `timestamp` that falls between the minimum and maximum in chronological order.
All [`timestamp` values](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/spec.html#timestamp) represent an instant in time.
A `timestamp` with limited precision (for example, a year-only timestamp like `2007T`) maps to an instant by assuming that all unspecified time unit fields are effectively zero (or one for the month and day units). 
`2007T` would map to the instant represented by `2007-01-01T00:00.000-00:00`.
Note that `timestamp` values that do not have a time component (that is `YYYYT`, `YYYY-MMT`, and `YYYY-MM-DDT` timestamps) have an unknown offset (`-00:00`).
Timestamps that have an unknown offset are UTC timestamps that make no assertion about the offset in which they occurred.
The value `null.timestamp` is never in the bounds of a timestamp range, and `timestamp` ranges do not include values of any other type.

# Open Content

{% include grammar-element.md productions="user_content_declaration,user_content_declaration_field" %}

> The Ion Schema 2.0 specification allows users to insert additional content into a schema document that is not part of the Ion Schema Language.

Reviewer 6: I recommend restructuring this sentence to improve clarity. Since it's the "additional content", not the "schema document" that is "not part of the Ion schema language", I'd suggest:

> The Ion Schema 2.0 specification allows users to insert additional content that is not part of the Ion Schema language into a schema document.

If the field name is a *reserved symbol*, its use as open content must be declared in the appropriate subfield of the `user_content` field in the schema header.
For example, the reserved symbol `list_type` may be used in a type definition if `user_content: { type: [ list_type ] }` is present in the schema header.

{% capture sample_code %}
```ion
schema_header::{
  info: "This schema is about penguins.",
  user_content: {
    schema_header: [info],
    type: [region, crested, banded],
  }
}
type::{
  name: adelie,
  type: penguin,
  region: antarctica,
  crested: false,
  banded: false,
}
type::{
  name: humboldt,
  type: penguin,
  region: south_america,
  crested: false,
  banded: true,
}
schema_footer::{}
```
{% endcapture %}
{% include example.md title="A schema with open content using reserved symbols as open content field names." markdown=sample_code %}

An Ion Schema MAY include extra top-level values that are not explicitly specified in the Ion Schema specification, but any top-level open content MUST NOT be annotated with a *reserved symbol*.
Top-level open content may appear before, after, or in between the Ion Schema version marker, header, types, and footer.

> Note that Ion Schema version markers are always interpreted as Ion Schema version markers and can never be valid open content.

Reviewer 6: Although I can understand what it intends, this sentence as-written reads like a truism because Ion Schema version markers are by definition Ion Schema version markers. Maybe something like the following would be more clear.

> Note that a top-level symbol value with the same text as an Ion schema version marker is always interpreted as an Ion Schema version marker and can never be valid open content.

{% capture sample_code %}
```ion
penguins

$ion_schema_2_0

$note_to_self::"I really like penguins. Get ready!"
3
2
1
Go

schema_header::{
  _info: "This schema is about penguins."
}

(I <3 Penguins!)

type::{
  name: adelie,
  type: penguin,
  _region: antarctica,
  _crested: false,
  _banded: false,
}

"I have watched many penguin documentaries and know many facts about penguins."

type::{
  name: humboldt,
  type: penguin,
  _region: south_america,
  _crested: false,
  _banded: true,
}

FAQ::{
  q: "What is the biggest type of penguin?",

>   a: "The emperor penguin."

Reviewer 6: For accuracy, consider "biggest *extant* species of penguin". We don't want to anger fans of the late Colossus penguin.

Author: 🐧 👍
